Paul Jones\
Rutgers University\
CS206: Introduction to Discrete Structures II, Spring 2013\
Professor David Cash\

Homework 4

1.  (10 points total) Two teams $x$ and $y$ are playing each other in
    the World Series, which is a best-of-seven-game match that ends when
    one team wins 4 games. Assume that team $x$ wins each game with
    probability $p$, and that the outcome of each game constitutes an
    independent trial.

    1.  (0.5 points) What is the probability that $x$ wins the first
        four games?

        -   There is one way for x to win in four, and that’s winning
            four in a row.

        -   By the multiplicity principle, we can multiply the chance of
            winning each game to get the probability of winning all
            games.

            $$p^4$$

    2.  (2 points) What is the probability that $x$ wins four games
        after at most five game have been played?

        -   Sample space, strings, x character means x won, y character
            means y won.

                        
                        xxxx
                        yxxxx
                        xyxxx
                        xxyxx
                        xxxyx
                        
                        

        -   The team represented by y cannot win at the end because
            after 4 x wins, the games halt.

        -   P(x wins in less than five games) =
            $P(\mathrm{\{xxxx, yxxxx, xyxxx, xxyxx, xxxyx\}})$

        -   There is a $(1 - p)$ chance of y winning.

        -   The x team still needs to win 4 games, which has a
            probability of $p^4$.

        -   Multiplying these two values gets you the likelihood that
            this happens for any given instance of x winning in less
            than five games.

        -   To get all of the possible less than 5 games combinations,
            multiply by the number there are, which is 4.

        -   Then, add the probability of just 4 straight victories.
            $$(1 - p) \times p^4 \times 4 + p^4$$

    3.  (2 points) What is the probability that $x$ will win four games
        before $y$ wins four games? (i.e., What is the probability that
        $x$ wins the Series?)

        -   To begin, lets enumerate some possibilities using strings.

            $$\{\mathrm{xxxx}\}$$

            $$\{\mathrm{yxxxx,
                    xyxxx,
                    xxyxx,
                    xxxyx}\}$$

            $$\{\mathrm{yyxxxx,
                    yxyxxx,
                    ...,
                    xxxyyx}\}$$

            $$\{\mathrm{yyyxxxx,
                    yyxyxxx,
                    ...,
                    xxxyyyx}\}$$

        -   These are all the possibilities for x winning. Name these
            $X_1$ through $X_4$ and notice the sum of their
            probabilities to be the probability that $x$ wins four
            games.

        -   For $X_3$, there are ${5 \choose 2,3}$ ways of ordering x
            and y, y has to win twice, and x still has to win four
            times.

        -   You have to subtract off the cases where there is a y at the
            end,

            $${4 \choose 1,3} \times (1 - y)^2 \times p^4$$

        -   For $X_4$, there are ${6 \choose 3,3}$ ways of ordering x
            and y, y has to win thrice, and x still has to win four
            times.

            $${5 \choose 2,3} \times (1 - y)^3 \times p^4$$

        -   Now add 4 straight victories:

            $${4 \choose 1,3} \times (1 - y)^2 \times p^4 + {5 \choose 2,3} \times (1 - y)^3 \times p^4 + p^4$$

    4.  (0.5 points) Calculate and simplify your answer in part (c) when
        $p=1/2$ and when $p=2/3$.

        -   $p = 1 / 2 : 1/2$

        -   $p = 2 / 3 : 1808/2187$

    5.  (1 point) Let $X$ be the random variable that counts the number
        of games that are played. What is ${\mathrm{Range}}(X)$?

        $$R(X) = \{4, 5, 6, 7 \}$$

    6.  (2 points) What is $P(X=7)$?

        $${6 \choose 3}(1 - p)^3 p^4 + {6 \choose 3} p^3 (1 - p)^3 p^4$$

    7.  (2 points) What is $P(X\geq 6)$?

        $${5 \choose 2}(1 - p)^2 p^4 + {5 \choose 2} p^2 (1 - p)^4 + {6 \choose 3} (1 - p)^3 p^4 + {6 \choose 3} p^3 (1 - p)^4$$

2.  (4 points) Suppose we roll two fair dice. Let the random variable
    $X=$ “the minimum of the two dice” and $Y =$ “the absolute value of
    the difference of the two dice”. Find $E(X)$ and $E(Y)$.

    -   $E(X)$

        -   The formula to solve this is

            $$E(X) = \sum_{a_i \in R(X)}a_i P(X = a_1)$$

        -   The sample space has a cardinality of 36, as there 6 choices
            for each of the two choices.

        -   All rolls are equally likely in a fair dice.

        -   Starting with the highest element in the range (which is the
            set containing 1 through 6), there is only one way 6 can be
            the minimum.

            $$P(x = 6) = P(\lbrace(6, 6) \rbrace) = \frac{1}{36}$$

        -   There are 3 ways of “getting 5”, and that’s rolling two
            fives, and then both variations of a five and a six.

            $$P(x = 5) = P(\lbrace(5, 5), (5, 6), (6,5) \rbrace) = \frac{3}{36}$$

        -   Apply the same pattern,

            $$P(x = 4) = P(\lbrace(4, 4), (4, 5), (5,4), (4,6), (6,4) \rbrace) = \frac{5}{36}$$
            $$P(x = 3) = P(\lbrace(3, 3), (3, 4), (4,3), (3,5), (5,3), (3,6), (6,3) \rbrace) = \frac{7}{36}$$
            $$P(x = 2) = P(\lbrace(2, 2), (2, 3), (3,2), (2, 4), (4, 2), (2, 5), (5,2), (2,6), (6,2)) = \frac{9}{36}$$

        -   Notice that there 2 more each time.

            $$P(x = 1) = \frac{11}{36}$$

        -   Now sum them and multiply them by their value ($a_i$) to
            find expected value,

            $$E(X) = \left(6 \times \frac{1}{36}\right) + \left(5 \times \frac{3}{36}\right) + \left(4 \times \frac{5}{36}\right) + \left(3 \times \frac{7}{36}\right) + \left(2 \times \frac{9}{36}\right) + \frac{11}{36} = 2.5277777778$$

    -   $E(Y)$

        -   The range is $\{0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5\}$.

        -   This is another application of the formula
            $$E(X) = \sum_{a_i \in R(X)}a_i P(X = a_1)$$

        -   There are 6 ways of getting 0, $\{6 - 6, 5 - 5, ...\}$. For
            $i = 0$, $$0 \times P(X = 0) = 0 \times \frac{6}{36} = 0$$

        -   There are 10 ways of getting 1,
            $\{6 - 5, 5 - 6, 5 - 4, 4 - 5, 4 - 3, 3 - 4, 3 - 2, 2 - 3, 2 - 1, 1 - 2\}$.
            For $i = 1$, $$1 \times P(X = 1) = 1 \times \frac{10}{36}$$

        -   There are 8 ways of getting 2,
            $\{6 - 4, 4 - 6, 5 - 3, 3 - 5, 4 - 2, 2 - 4, 1 - 5, 5 - 1\}$.
            For $i = 2$,
            $$2 \times P(X = 2) = 2 \times \frac{8}{36} = \frac{4}{9}$$

        -   There are 6 ways of getting 3,
            $\{6 - 3, 3 - 6, 5 - 2, 2 - 5, 4 - 1, 1 - 4\}$. For $i = 3$,
            $$3 \times P(X = 3) = 3 \times \frac{6}{36} = \frac{2}{3}$$

        -   There are 4 ways of getting 4,
            $\{6 - 2, 2 - 6, 5 - 1, 1 - 5\}$. For $i = 4$,
            $$4 \times P(X = 4) = 4 \times \frac{4}{36} = \frac{4}{9}$$

        -   There are 2 ways of getting 5, $\{6 - 1, 1 - 6\}$. For
            $i = 5$,
            $$5 \times P(X = 5) = 5 \times \frac{2}{36} = \frac{5}{18}$$

        -   We know we’ve covered the sample space because the sum of
            the specific instances is the same as the cardinality of the
            sample space.

        -   The expected value,
            $$E(X) = 0 + \frac{2}{9} + \frac{4}{9} + \frac{2}{3} + \frac{4}{9} +  \frac{5}{18} = 1.94 \approx 2$$

3.  (4 points) Suppose boxes of cereal are filled with a random prize,
    each drawn from independently and uniformly from $6$ possible
    prizes. If we buy $N$ boxes of cereal, what is the expected number
    of distinct prizes we will collect?

    -   Let $X_1 ... X_6$ be the identifier for each of 6 unique toys

        $$E\left(\sum I_{E_i}\right) = \sum_{i = 1}^6 E(I_{E_i}) = 6(1 - \left(5/6)\right)^n$$

4.  (4 points) A group of $m$ men and $w$ randomly sit in a single row
    at a theater. If a man and woman are seated next to each other we
    say they form a couple. (Couples can overlap, meaning that one
    person can be a member of two couples.) What is the expected number
    of couples?

    -   Use linearity of expectation for each pair of seats.

    -   Let $x$ equal the number of seats.

    -   Then, $E(X_1) = P($couple in a seat 1 and 2$)$,
        $E(X_2) = P($couple in a seat 2 and 3$)$, etc.

    -   For any given seat, there is a $\frac{1}{2}$ chance of their
        being a man or a woman in the seat.

    -   The four possibilities are {mw, wm, mm, ww}.

5.  (3 points) Suppose an experiment tosses a fair coin twice; the
    experiment “succeeds” if both tosses were Heads. We repeat this
    experiment for 12 independent trials. Let $N$ be the random variable
    that counts the fraction of trials that are successful (so
    $N = S/12$, where $S$ is the number of successful trials). Find
    $E(N)$.

    $$E(N) = E\left(\frac{S}{12}\right)$$ $$S = \{ x_1 + ... + x_12 \}$$
    $$\frac{1}{12} E(S)$$
    $$E(S) = \sum_{a_i \in R(S)} a_i \times P(X_i)$$
    $$P(X_i) = \frac{1}{4}$$ $$E(S) = 12 \times E(X_i)$$
    $$\frac{1}{12}E(S) = 12 \times \frac{1}{4}$$ $$E(S) = \frac{1}{4}$$


